Hello and welcome to another tutorial.
We're going to continue our discussion on how to download, install and set up the Native Image tool.
We looked at the Mac OS and Linux and now we're going to look at the last one, which is Windows.
Windows is always a little bit different than Mac OS and Linux because Mac OS and Linux they share the
same core, which is Unix operating system, whereas Windows things are a little bit different, right?
So first of all, Windows doesn't really use the bash terminal.
So born again shell terminal.
So Windows uses its own command prompt or in the Windows ten.
Basically the recent versions of Windows, they introduced this PowerShell you can install Bash Terminal
in Windows ten or the most recent versions by installing the Linux subsystem for Windows.
Or you can just download the install some bash terminal emulator.
So these are emulators.
So you type the bash commands or UNIX commands in that emulator and that behind the scenes it translates
to the Windows commands, right?
For example, in a bash terminal you say ls and it lists all the files in the Windows Command prompt.
You have to say dear or directory it lists or the directory.
So this kind of emulators, you don't install an actual bash terminal, you just it just emulates that.
So behind the scenes it translates the command back and forth.
Now I have conditions that you install emc2 and what it does, it not only provides a terminal, a bash
terminal emulator for you, it also allows you to install.
Basically, it has git repositories, online repositories that allow you to install, for example,
GCC for Windows, which is open source build tool.
But for our use case, as we saw before, Native Image mainly works with the default toolchain of your
platform in Windows.
It's a microsoft visual compiler, so you pretty much have no option.
If you want to use Native Image to compile your Java application to native executable binary, you have
to install Microsoft visual compiler.
Right?
So and the most straightforward way is to download the Microsoft Visual Studio installer and then select
only C++ stuff and then done right C and C++ and stuff.
And then you install it, it installs the IDE, all the necessary build tools.
We saw that.
The complication here is that when you install that, it doesn't add the all the command line directories
that you need for the compiler to run in the terminal to the path.
So you have to manually set them up.
Right.
All right.
So we're going to download it, install LLVM, the latest version, I believe the latest version at
the time of recording this video is 20 2.1.0.
And then after that a native image doesn't come by default with the downloaded file.
Then you have to use the global update to install a native image.
And the main difference here is that in the Mac OS and UNIX, we saw that in the Bing directory.
In addition to the executable binaries that are from the JDK, there are also extra executable binaries
like juju, right?
But in Windows, juju is not an executable file, it's a command line script.
And when you run it in terminal, it actually runs all the lines in that terminal, right in that command
line script.
So this is one of the main differences.
And so you have to keep this dot cmd because if you type the name of a application without any extension
in the command prompt in Windows, it assumes that it's a dot x dot x or basically it's an executable
application, which is the default assumption even in Mac OS and Linux bash terminal is right.
Whenever you type something without some DOT something without any extension, the terminal assumes
that it's supposed to be an executable.
So you have to execute CMD, which is a command prompt, a script and know that this is not compatible
with the Bash Terminal emulator.
So you kind of need to run this in the default command prompt and then install native image.
It reaches out to the git repository and then downloads a native image and installs it.
And then you can add the Bing director of the VM to pass and therefore you can both use the JDK that
comes with the Google VM and also the native image directly is available and the same thing happens
to Native Image.
It's not an executable file, it's a command line script.
So again, if you type native dash image, the terminal doesn't recognize it.
You have to say native dash, image, dot, cmd, which, and then you pass some arguments and then
this script reads the arguments and execute some commands.
All right.
So in the windows, the G view, the Global Updater and the native image, these are command line scripts.
Okay.
After we install the download the native image we test, we try to run the native image script that
cmd hyphen, hyphen version and see if it works fine here.
I've just dragged and dropped the native image at cmd file directly to the terminal hyphen hyphen version
and it tells me that it's the album Java 17 edition, so everything works fine.
You can do the same thing in Windows PowerShell.
So in the Windows PowerShell, you can type, you can go to the Bing directory of the Grand VM and then
say you cmd install native image, right?
So run cmd, which is a command line script from the Bing directory.
So let's head to Windows and see what we can.
So search for download Google Vim and then click on the first link.
It takes you to the home page and then we want to download the community edition.
The latest version is 22.1.
So let's see download.
It takes us to the to the git repository and then we want to select windows and at the moment Linux
and Mac OS, they are available both for X 64 bit platform which is AMD, Intel and ARM, but then Windows
apparently only is available for the Intel and AMD, which is the x 64 architecture.
So let's go with JDK 17, let's hit the download and then it's going to basically start downloading.
The size of the file is about 350 megabyte.
But it's going to take some time.
And after that, we're going to unzipped and then moving to a movie, to our program files where we
where we installed our other ADCs.
So I'm going to open the directory and then extract it here.
So right click seven Z extract here.
And then I'm going to open up my file explorer.
And go to the program files.
So this PC, the root directory of my operating system program files and in Java.
And then so far I've installed the JDK 17, JDK eight, I've installed an older version which of LLVM
17, which is 22.02, and now the most recent version is 20 2.1.0.
So we just we can't copy or cut it.
I'm going to copy and then paste this here.
And then it asks us for administrative permission.
We say yes.
You don't really need to enter any password.
It's going to just copy and paste to the root of our C folder program files and then in the Java directory.
After this is done, we're going to run our terminal, which I already have it here.
And then
we can.
Let's go.
And.
Let's wait for this to finish and then we can run the from the bin directory.
We can run the Google Updater and.
And then install the native image.
So it's almost done.
I'm running in a virtual machine, so it's a little bit slow, but again, almost done.
And we can, uh, close this, uh, window.
We can also minimize our explorer, the Microsoft Edge.
So almost down.
Let's wait again to finish.
And Windows ten also comes with the PowerShell.
So the PowerShell, I believe you can try like the bash command here, for example.
Liz It works fine, right?
So it kind of is closer to the bash terminal in macOS and Linux.
So I have the CMD here and also the the PowerShell.
So let's put these side by side.
Okay.
And then we can work with PowerShell or Command prompt.
So this one is almost done.
Let's wait a little bit more.
So for example, in the command prompt if you type let's it's not going to probably work.
It actually works nicely, which is interesting.
So you type the air and it shows you the list in a basically.
Okay, so this is done.
What we can do now.
For example, go here, go to the bin directory and actually so we can copy this path and then say a
CD and then use a double code.
And then we are now in the LLVM 17 version, 22 .1.0 and then the bin directory.
And now if I use if I type go hyphen, hyphen version, it's not going to find it.
Let's see.
And then if we say, gee, you seemed hyphen, hyphen, version.
Uh, let's see.
So we have to say dot.
For example, you dot, cmd, hyphen, hyphen, virgin.
Now it works fine.
I guess backslash also works fine in the PowerShell.
Yes.
So if we don't add the current directory here, you.
It's not going to work.
We can try with the command prompt.
So let's copy this path again and then yes, let's use double code because of the space in the program
files.
And now let's say geo hyphen hyphen version.
It works interestingly.
And then Duda cmd, hyphen, hyphen version.
It also works, right?
So let's stick a state with the command prompt.
And if I typed you here, you see juju is a cmd command line script so we can open with the text editor
and it has some scripts that get run.
Right.
So this is not a native executable file, it's a script.
So what we can say is a dot cmd install native image.
So insufficient privileges for administration of VM.
You need become an administrator user to perform administrative tasks on global VM.
Depending on sim, you may need to use OS tools or.
Okay.
So let's try this here.
So go cmd install native image.
So insufficient privileges for administration.
So let's see.
Sudo and indu dot cmd.
Let's see if this works.
Install native image.
All right.
So what we're going to do actually what we need to do, we need to run the terminal with the administrative
privileges, let's say type CMD and then right click run as administrator.
Now we are an administrator, so let's change back to the Bing directory of the VM CD and note that
use that double code so that because program files unfortunately has a space in it.
And then let's go back here and then say you dot cmd install native image and now it's downloading the
native image from a LLVM repositories from Git Hub and then installing new components.
It's going to put a native dash image cmd file in the Bing directory.
So let's wait this for this to finish.
It's installing the new component and after it's finished, we are ready to quickly check whether the
native image works fine.
So I'm going to open up this test directory and create a new text file.
Let's call it our Hello World dot Java.
I want to quickly update basically write a simple Hello World Java application and then compile it with
the native image public class hello world and then US public static
static void main and then a string args and then system dot out the print line.
Hello world from Java application in windows and semicolon.
So this is our Java application.
So apparently so this is done.
And then let's say if we have the native image that cmd hyphen hyphen version and it works fine, so,
so native image is ready to go.
All right, so we are in the Bing directory, what we can do.
First of all, we can go ahead and define a Google home environment variable.
So let's do that.
Let's go one directory up.
Here and then copy this.
And then we are going to go back to our file explorer and then these PC system properties and then advanced
system settings, environment variables.
And then we're going to in the user variable for this particular user, I'm going to create a new one.
I'm going to call it growl home.
And the value it's going, I'm going to put it actually in double quotes because of this space in program
voice and hit.
Okay, okay, let's close the terminal or command prompt and then open it up again.
And we are going to say that echo percent growl home and C program files.
Okay.
And then we're going to say that percent crawl home.
We're accessing an environment variable slash being a slash native dash image and dot cmd hyphen hyphen
version is not as an internal or external command.
So the problem here is that we have to put it in.
Do we need to put it in the double codes?
No.
So I guess we need to go back to the system settings, environment variables, edit this and remove
that double code that we had here.
Let's see if this works.
Let's close this and open this up again.
All right.
And then.
Echo percent.
Growl home.
All right.
And then go all home.
Percent been or for what is like oh actually we should probably use backward slash being and then native
dash image that cmd hyphen hyphen version.
All right so that is space in the program files.
Word is going to cause a problem so let's put the growl home in a double code here and now this works.
So make sure that there is.
Unfortunately in Windows the program files directory has a space in it and terminals command prompts.
They're not really that friendly to a space.
So you kind of need to put them in double code to tell the terminal to treat them as raw as string.
Right.
All right.
So our crawl home is basically a nicely defined actually.
We can also define a non standard environment variable in Windows for simplicity, which is called the
growl growl bean.
So let's go back here and then open up our environment variables, new environment variables, growl
underscore bin all caps and then paste the bing directory.
Okay.
All right.
And then let's quickly close up and open up our terminal.
And if I say basically growl underscore bing directory and then forward slash native image dot cmd hyphen,
hyphen version.
Okay.
So again, we have to put this in double codes describing because of the space in program files.
We need to use a backward slash here so we use a backward slash in the command prompt.
Everything works fine.
Make sure that you put this crawl bin or crawl home in the double code so that it works.
All right, so we have access to our native image.
Everything seems to be set properly.
And then I'm going to use the JDK that comes with the.
So that comes with the um we DeGraw VM to compile my job application.
So I'm going to seed into the test directory or actually in the desktop and then this test directory.
All right.
So I have hello world I'm going to say double code growl a bean directory, double code and then backward
slash java C hyphen c p here and then a hello world java.
So let's see, everything compiles fine.
We're using the Java compiler from the Grail VM and now we have the Hello vocal class.
And we're going to say that instead of Java C, we're going to use the JVM and give it the name of the
class, which is Hello World and it works fine.
So right now we were able to quickly compile and now we're going to say that growl bean and then instead
of using the JDK or JVM, we're going to use the native image dart CMD and you give it the class path,
which we only have one class and that's in the current working directory.
So class path is the DOT or the current working directory and then the name of the class file which
is Helloworld.
So let's run this.
So it's going to fail because Native Image tries to search for the default toolchain, which is the
Microsoft visual compiler and I believe Microsoft visual compiler.
Let's see.
Yeah.
So default native compiler executable cl codecs not found.
So CL exit is the command line tool for the Microsoft visual compiler.
It was not found on the path.
And what we said before, you have to so you have to go to the where you install the Microsoft visual
compiler.
So this PC C Drive program files Microsoft Visual Studio, the Virgin community, and then there is
a VCC visual compiler auxiliary build and they have a command line as scripts for setting up the environment
variable if you want to do a 64 bit compiler.
So you just drag this and then basically execute it.
It's a command line script that sets the.
So it's the value.
And now actually what we can do, we can actually define a global environment variable.
So let's also do that.
That's, that's very good to have makes life much easier.
So let's go to the PC system properties and then advanced system settings and then environment variable.
I'm going to say that RMS V C was 64 bit.
I mean, I'm going to only use the 64 bit, so it's not going to be and then backwards slash and then
the name of this the name of this application which is we see visual compiler was variable 64 bit.
Let's paste this here.
Okay.
Now what I'm going to do if I close this and open this up again, if I say select Excel, it's not going
to find it because the path is not correctly said.
But if I say MZ V.C. or basically I'm accessing an environment variable RMS, we see rms v c underscore
vars.
Yeah, we have to do it.
Use it in the double code.
And now it automatically runs the 64 bit and the path is set.
So if I say echo percent path and now all the Microsoft visual compiler directories that I need to compile
an application from terminal are added to the path and they are set up for the 64 bit compiler.
So I recommend you define these environment variables so that it's very easy.
Now my path is set up.
So let's go back to our desktop for a slice test.
We are have we have this hello world class.
So let's go now run our native image.
So we're going to say that crawl.
Let's actually go, let's, let's run this with the double code later I'll, we'll check whether we
can somehow get rid of this double code because it's a little bit annoying.
So grabbing environment variable in the double code because program files has a space.
So we want to get rid of that and then backwards slash native dash image dot cmd and then hyphen CP
here.
Right, the class path is here and then the name of the class hello world and then the output.
We want to put it here, let's call it my Java app.
So it's going to be able to find a cloud exit, which is the Microsoft Visual Studio compiler.
So VM native image creating creating this my app Java in the current working directory, everything
seems to be going well.
There is no error.
So it was able to find a default toolchain of the Windows, which is the Microsoft visual compiler.
And again, the trick is to go to the auxiliary directory in the bean and then run v c var 64 dot bat.
And the easiest thing is to define a global environment variable that points to this file and then just
quickly run it in a in your command prompt.
All right.
So let's wait this to finish.
Usually the compilation of a class is relatively fast.
I'm running in a virtual machine, so it takes a little bit of more time, but it's going to eventually
finish up and then we can quickly execute the output next executable file, which is my Java app, and
make sure that it prints the the right thing to the console.
Right.
So this is a quick test that our native image is quick correctly installed.
The default toolchain of the platform is set and then we can also compile a Java application to the
native executable binary.
So this is just a quick demo in the future lecture.
I will go into all the details and we'll show you how to basically I will show you what command line
parameters that you can use with the native image and more details in Java.
So it's still compiling.
So it's using the C compiler called X, which is Microsoft X 64.
This is the same version of the Microsoft visual compiler.
So no problem.
Which finally we're finding with finding the default toolchain of Windows.
By default it uses the serial GC for the garbage collector and then it's compiling building universe
parsing methods.
Enlightening methods.
So everything is going as expected.
So we will at the end get our executable file.
It's probably no problem.
We're not going to encounter any.
Usually you encounter a problem at the beginning if the native image cannot dictate your default platform
compiler, but once it detects that, everything else should go smoothly.
So compiling methods.
And now everything is done.
Our executable file is there.
And as you can see, the extension is that exa we know that in macros linux executable files don't have
any extensions.
So you can either run it with my java app dot xa.
And it works.
And you don't need to add the current working directory.
You don't say you don't need to say dot and then my Java app,
you can do that.
But that's not necessary because the current in Windows, the current working directory is automatically
appended to the path.
But you can also drop the extension, right?
Because when you type some name with some space and something else, the terminal always assumes that
the first string until it hits a space is the name of the executable application and the other strings
are the command line arguments that are passed.
Right?
So it doesn't matter if I say my Java app or my Java app not exist.
So we were able to compile our job application to a native executable.
The size is large.
12 megabytes mostly comes from the Java and the JDK and the garbage collector stuff, and our native
image is fully set up on windows.
Again, setting up the native image windows is a little bit more complicated than macOS and Linux,
but I hope you now have a good understanding how to set it up.
And from the next lecture we're going to see how to actually use the native image.
So please stay tuned and I'll see the next one.